What is Bitcoin?

by Patrice Krakow, 2021-12-07 (0.1.0)

Satoshi Nakamoto has defined Bitcoin as "A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System".

Let's first explain the "electronic cash" part. One naive perspective is that electronic cash is impossible. Cash has one important property: when you gave it to someone you don't have it anymore. It may sound obvious, but that's a property you don't have with any electronic records. You can copy any electronic records! So electronic cash would be cash you can copy as you like, that does not work. That problem is often called the double-spending problem. Copying cash or spending the same cash many times is equal.

Bitcoin is solving this problem by maintaining a ledger containing all transactions. It's like an electronic book containing all transfers of money from one party to another. Then, when there is a new transfer, you can check if the payer has enough money by calculating the difference between all the money she/he has received and all the money she/he has spent. It may sound tedious to calculate the balance of the payer for each new transaction, but it works with computers.

The second part of the definition is "peer-to-peer". The goal of Satoshi was to allow online direct payments, without going through any intermediates. The ledger described above only works if double-spending attempts are chased and eliminated. In our current monetary system that's the role of banks, that we must trust. The revolution of Bitcoin has been to find a way to have one single shared consistent ledger without the need of any trusted parties.

Bitcoin is providing this single shared consistent ledger using blockchain and Proof-of-Work (PoW). The blockchain is a chain of blocks. We said that the ledger is like an electronic book. Let's call blocks the pages of this book. And let's see the succession of pages in this book as a chain of blocks. Since there are no trusted parties, it means that everyone can write the next block in the blockchain. Everyone can write a new block, but only one party should actually write a block at a time. Otherwise, you will not have a single blockchain anymore. So, we need to find a way for everyone to agree on who's gonna write the next block. The trick is to have a kind of lottery in which you can "buy" as many tickets as you like. Each party writes its version of the new block, containing some new transactions. Each block sets its own target of the lottery. Then each party has to use its computing power to generate tickets and check if they win. The first party who can show to others that it has a winning ticket writes the new block, and a new lottery starts.

But, why do people would take part in those lotteries? What do they win? It's easy, they win money. We are familiar with having and spending some money. We can visualize this ledger containing all the transfers of money from one party to another. But, how did it start? From where does the "first" money come from? In our current monetary system, central banks are creating money. Creating money, how do you create money? It's easy! You write a transfer of a certain amount to someone coming from no one. It's as simple as that. That's how banks are regulating the amount of money within the monetary system. With Bitcoin, the winner of the lottery, the party writing the new block is getting the new money. Within the block, she/he can write a transfer from nowhere to her/him.

That's the beauty of having a self-power system. People need money. You need people to maintain a money system. The money system gives money to people maintaining the money system. Bitcoin is an always-running dynamic system, and that might be its biggest weakness. If Bitcoin ever stops, it will be gone.
